[[python-windows]]
Install Python on Windows
-------------------------

So you want to learn to program? One of the most common languages to
start with is https://www.python.org/[Python], popular for its unique
blend of
https://opensource.com/article/19/7/get-modular-python-classes[object-oriented]
structure and simple syntax. Python is also an _interpreted_
__language__, meaning you don't need to learn how to compile code into
machine language: Python does that for you, allowing you to test your
programs sometimes instantly and, in a way, while you write your code.

Just because Python is easy to learn doesn't mean you should
underestimate its potential power. Python is used by
https://github.com/edniemeyer/weta_python_db[movie]
https://www.python.org/about/success/ilm/[studios], financial
institutions, IT houses, video game studios, makers, hobbyists,
https://opensource.com/article/19/7/rgb-cube-python-scribus[artists],
teachers, and many others.

On the other hand, Python is also a serious programming language, and
learning it takes dedication and practice. Then again, you don't have to
commit to anything just yet. You can install and try Python on nearly
any computing platform, so if you're on Windows, this article is for
you.

If you want to try Python on a completely open source operating system,
you can
https://opensource.com/article/19/7/ways-get-started-linux[install
Linux] and then https://opensource.com/article/17/10/python-101[try
Python].

[[windows-get-python]]
Get Python
~~~~~~~~~~

Python is available from its website,
https://www.python.org/downloads/[Python.org]. Once there, hover your
mouse over the *Downloads* menu, then over the *Windows* option, and
then click the button to download the latest release.

image:img/win-python-install.jpg[image]

Alternatively, you can click the *Downloads* menu button and select a
specific version from the downloads page.

[[windows-install-python]]
Install Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the package is downloaded, open it to start the installer.

It is safe to accept the default install location, and it's vital to add
Python to PATH. If you don't add Python to your PATH, then Python
applications won't know where to find Python (which they require in
order to run). This is _not_ selected by default, so activate it at the
bottom of the install window before continuing!

image:img/win-python-path.jpg[image]

Before Windows allows you to install an application from a publisher
other than Microsoft, you must give your approval. Click the *Yes*
button when prompted by the *User Account Control* system.

image:img/win-python-publisher.jpg[image]

Wait patiently for Windows to distribute the files from the Python
package into the appropriate locations, and when it's finished, you're
done installing Python.

Time to play.

[[windows-run-an-ide]]
Install an IDE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To write programs in Python, all you really need is a text editor, but
it's convenient to have an integrated development environment (IDE). An
IDE integrates a text editor with some friendly and helpful Python
features. IDLE 3 and Pycharm (Community Edition) are two great open
source options to consider.

[[windows-idle-3]]
IDLE 3
^^^^^^

Python comes with an IDE called IDLE. You can write code in any text
editor, but using an IDE provides you with keyword highlighting to help
detect typos, a *Run* button to test code quickly and easily, and other
code-specific features that a plain text editor like
https://notepad-plus-plus.org/[Notepad++] normally doesn't have.

To start IDLE, click the *Start* (or **Window**) menu and type *python*
for matches. You may find a few matches, since Python provides more than
one interface, so make sure you launch IDLE.

image:img/idle3.png[image]

If you don't see Python in the Start menu, reinstall Python. Be sure to
select *Add Python to PATH* in the install wizard. Refer to the
http://docs.python.org/3/using/windows.html[Python docs] for detailed
instructions.

[[windows-pycharm-ide]]
PyCharm IDE
^^^^^^^^^^^

If you already have some coding experience and IDLE seems too simple for
you, try
https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/download/#section=windows[PyCharm
(Community Edition)], an open source IDE for Python. It has keyword
highlighting to help detect typos, quotation and parenthesis completion
to avoid syntax errors, line numbers (helpful when debugging),
indentation markers, and a *Run* button to test code quickly and easily.

To install it, visit the PyCharm IDE website, download the installer,
and run it. The process is the same as with Python: start the installer,
allow Windows to install a non-Microsoft application, and wait for the
installer to finish.

Once PyCharm is installed, double-click the PyCharm icon on your desktop
or select it from the Start menu.

[[windows-tell-python-what-to-do]]
Tell Python what to do
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Keywords tell Python what you want it to do. In IDLE, go to the File
menu and create a new file. In PyCharm, click the *New Project* button.

In your new, empty file, type this into IDLE or PyCharm:

....
print("Hello world.")
....

* If you are using IDLE, go to the Run menu and select the Run Module
option.
* If you are using PyCharm, click the Run button in the top right corner
of the window.

image:img/win-pycharm-button-run.jpeg[image]

Any time you run code, your IDE prompts you to save the file you're
working on. Do that before continuing.

The keyword *print* tells Python to print out whatever text you give it
in parentheses and quotes.

[OS_EMBEDDED_MENU_RIGHT:]That's not very exciting, though. At its core,
Python has access to only basic keywords like *print* and **help**,
basic math functions, and so on.

Use the *import* keyword to load more keywords. Start a new file and
name it **pen.py**.

**Warning**: Do _not_ call your file **turtle.py**, because *turtle.py*
is the name of the file that contains the turtle program you are
controlling. Naming your file *turtle.py* confuses Python because it
thinks you want to import your own file.

https://opensource.com/life/15/8/python-turtle-graphics[Turtle] is a fun
module to use. Add this code to your file:

....
import turtle

turtle.begin_fill()
turtle.forward(100)
turtle.left(90)
turtle.forward(100)
turtle.left(90)
turtle.forward(100)
turtle.left(90)
turtle.forward(100)
turtle.end_fill()
....

See what shapes you can draw with the turtle module.

To clear your turtle drawing area, use the *turtle.clear()* keyword.
What do you think the keyword *turtle.color("blue")* does?

Try more complex code:

....
import turtle as t
import time

t.color("blue")
t.begin_fill()

counter = 0

while counter < 4:
    t.forward(100)
    t.left(90)
    counter = counter+1

t.end_fill()
time.sleep(2)
....

Notice that turtle, in this example code, has not only been imported,
but it's also been given the shorter nickname **t**, which is quicker
and easier to type. This is a convenience function in Python.

[[windows-challenge]]
Challenge
^^^^^^^^^

As a challenge, try changing your script to get this result:

image:win-python-idle-turtle.jpg[image]

Once you complete that script, you're ready to move on to more exciting
modules. A good place to start is this
https://opensource.com/article/17/10/python-101#python-101-dice-game[introductory
dice game].

[[windows-stay-pythonic]]
Stay Pythonic
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Python is a fun language with modules for practically anything you can
think to do with it. As you can see, it's easy to get started with
Python, and as long as you're patient with yourself, you may find
yourself understanding and writing Python code with the same fluidity as
you write your native language.
Try scripting some small tasks for yourself, and see where Python takes you.
To really integrate Python with your daily workflow, you might even try Linux, which is natively scriptable in ways no other operating system is.
You might find yourself, given enough time, using the applications you create!

Good luck, and stay Pythonic.

